The Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Make Draperies, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: How to Make Draperies
       Singer Sewing Library, No. 102

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: September 24, 2020 [EBook #63282]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO MAKE DRAPERIES ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









                                                                    29^c




                              How to Make
                               Draperies


  _Instructions for_
    • Fabrics
    • Color
    • Design
    • Measurements
    • Construction

                             _Published by_
                           THE SINGER COMPANY

                              Book No. 102

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: SINGER Sewing Library]




                              How to Make
                               Draperies


  CONTENTS                                                        _page_
  _Fabrics_                                                          _3_
  _Color and Design_                                                 _7_
  _Selection of Needles and Thread_                                  _8_
  _Window Measurements_                                             _11_
  _Construction Details_                                            _15_
  _Measuring for Pleats_                                            _26_

                                 _Copyright© 1960 by The Singer Company_

  _Copyright under International Copyright Union • All Rights Reserved
under Inter-America Copyright Union • No part of this book may be
reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission._

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]




                               _Fabrics_


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Drapery fabrics are available to us today in an overwhelming variety for
every decor—not only in the traditional fabrics, but also in the many
new synthetics and blends.

Whether the room is traditional, modern, formal or informal, you need
only visit the drapery fabric department to realize what a wide choice
of fabrics are available in either group.

Windows are so much a part of the background that the fabric chosen, its
texture, color and line, and the design of the curtains, draperies and
slip covers must be in keeping with the atmosphere of the room and
contribute to the over-all effect.

For the very formal treatment, you’ll want to choose something in the
Damask designs, taffetas, moires, brocades, satins, brocatelles or the
many blends of the pure and man-made fibers, some with metallic threads
woven in. Fringes and tassels are used as trims, and the window
treatment would include draped valances, swags, cascades, elaborate
cornices, tie-backs, etc.

For the less formal or informal room, the choice of fabric is even
wider—linens in medium and sheer weights, prints and lacey patterns,
marquisette, scrim, voile, ninon, denim, sailcloth, chintz, polished
cotton, antique satin, organdy, batiste and many blends of synthetics,
such as Fortisan and rayon or silk. The curtain treatment should be
simple. If valances are used, they should be plain with straight lines.

Many of the new synthetic fibers are a real advantage to the home-maker
because of their easy washing and quick drying properties. Some require
very little pressing, if any.

In estimating the yardage required, consider the length of the drapery,
before finishing hems and heading, and the width of the window or space
to be covered. An allowance of 2½ or 3 times the width should be made
for fullness. When using sheer fabrics, draperies should be full enough
to hang in easy, graceful folds. Over-curtains or draperies of medium
weight fabrics require a fullness of 2 to 2½ times the width. Also, if
you select a fabric with a large one-way design, some allowance should
be made for matching the design so all lengths will balance.

_For example:_ The window is 64″ wide which requires 4 widths of 48″
wide fabric for a 3 to 1 fullness. The drapery lengths are 2⅓ yards
long. If a plain fabric or overall design is used, the fabric required
would be 9⅓ yards, but if the fabric has a 24″ repeat pattern, you must
allow 1⅓ yards more, or a total of 10⅔ yards for matching the design.

Consider the width of the fabric when figuring the number of widths for
fullness. Some fabrics are only 36″ wide—chintz and some polished
cottons, for example. Others may run 40″—48″—even 54″ or 60″ in width;
but the average is about 48″ wide.

    [Illustration: Grain lines of fabric.]

  ⇐Crosswise Grain—Weft or Filling⇒
  ⇐Lengthwise Grain—Warp⇒
  ⇐True Bias⇒

Draperies must be cut on the true lengthwise and crosswise grain of the
fabric so that when hung, they fall straight from the rod in even,
graceful folds.

In weaving, yarns are threaded lengthwise on a loom which form the warp
of the fabric. Another yarn is interlaced back and forth crosswise and
is called the weft or filling thread. This is known as the plain weave.
Linen, voile, chintz, etc., are a few of the plain woven fabrics. There
are variations of the plain weave, such as the pile weave, with
velveteen and corduroy as examples. The basket weave is another, with
Monk’s cloth as an example. The diagonal line halfway between the
lengthwise and crosswise threads is the bias of the fabric.

The twill weave is perhaps one of the most durable. The filling yarn
forms a diagonal line, passing over one warp yarn and under two or more.
Denim, drill cloth and ticking are examples of this weave.

The satin weave is an irregular weave where one yarn passes over several
yarns of the other set before interweaving, forming a floating, lustrous
surface.

Weaves are used in combinations to obtain the various patterns in
Damasks, brocades, Jacquards, etc.

    [Illustration: Cutting on true crosswise grain.]

The yarns made from the different fibers—the natural, man-made and
blended fibers—are of various sizes, weights, smoothness and fuzziness.
The type of yarns used in the different weaves influences the texture of
the fabric as well as its weight, lustre and durability.

When cutting drapery lengths, be sure to start with a true crosswise
grain. Most firmly woven plain weave fabrics can be torn. Snip the
selvage before you tear the fabric. Linens, loosely woven and nubby
fabrics, novelty weaves and many others will not tear satisfactorily. To
straighten these, it is necessary to pull a thread crosswise and cut on
pulled line.

After cutting lengths, check to see if the ends of the fabric are
square. If not, square the crosswise edge by pulling the low corner on a
true bias from opposite side of the fabric. Sometimes dampening the
fabric will relax the threads and make straightening easier.


                          ESTIMATE OF YARDAGE

  DRAPERIES
     _Full Length Window—48″ Material_           6           YARDS
     _Full Length Window with Valance_           6½            ″
  LINING—_Full Length Window_                    5¼            ″

  These figures are the approximate requirements. Always, where
  possible, take careful measurements for more accurate estimate. It is
  much better to have extra material than not enough.

  When using materials with a large floral pattern or plaid, allow one
  full length of the motif for each additional length required for
  draperies.




                           _Color and Design_


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Color has a language all its own—It expresses, it soothes, it
stimulates, it creates; it can give you a lift. And color as a home
decorator can be made to work like magic. With color, the dullest rooms
can be made to sparkle with warmth and good cheer. Any color scheme is
good as long as it is balanced and it pleases you. A number of colors,
tints and shades may be used in one room, but one color should be
dominant and it should be used in different areas of the room. The
second color should be subordinate, not of the same value. Then a third
color may be used for accent or contrast. The neutral colors: gray,
white and black, are good background or accent colors.

Do not overlook the possibilities of accessories, such as pillows,
vases, china, lamps and books to supply an accent color to complete your
color scheme.

Your color scheme may be taken from a favorite picture, a family
heirloom or may express the interests and personalities of the family.
Consider also the location of the room—East, West, North or South—and
how the light enters the room.

There are three primary colors—red, yellow and blue. These colors are
mixed to obtain secondary colors. For example, red and yellow produce
the color orange; red and blue, the color violet and blue and yellow,
the color green. By blending these six colors we complete the color
wheel which is made up of red, red orange, orange, yellow, yellow green,
green, blue green, blue, blue violet and violet.

We refer to certain colors as warm, others as cool and still others as
neither warm nor cool. The warm colors are red, yellow and orange. The
cool colors are the blues. Green is neither warm nor cool but if mixed
with yellow, it becomes warm; when mixed with blue, it becomes a cool
color.

Color and line apparently change the size of the room. Cool, light
colors and vertical lines make walls appear higher and the room larger,
while warm colors and horizontal lines seem to lower the ceiling and
draw the walls nearer.

For North and East rooms, use warm colors. If little light enters in,
use light shades of the warm colors. Use the cool colors in rooms with
South or West exposures.

When purchasing your fabrics for curtains, draperies and slip covers,
keep in mind the overall effect. Consider the room exposure, light, size
of room, furniture arrangement and what color and design will do to
create a room you will always enjoy. Since windows are a very important
part of the room as a unit, the fabric chosen for curtains or draperies
should also be used to slip cover a sofa or chair, a dressing table
cover, or a dust ruffle for the bed.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]


_Selection of Needles and Thread_

Sewing thread should blend as nearly as possible with the fabric in
color, fiber and size. Silk and wool fabrics are stitched with silk
thread. Cottons, linens and some blended fabrics are stitched with
cotton thread or mercerized thread. The synthetic fabrics and blends of
the pure and man-made fibers may be stitched with silk, mercerized
cotton, nylon or Dacron (DuPont) thread. The needle is selected with
consideration to both the thread and the fabric.

With fabrics used for glass curtains and for sheer curtains, such as
organdy, voile, “Dacron,” dotted Swiss, marquisettes, batiste and sheer
linen, use a fine cotton thread, size 80 or 90, or a mercerized thread.
Use a size 14 needle for mercerized thread and a size 11 for finer
threads, including “Dacron” for “Dacron” fabrics, organdy, “Dacron,”
marquisette, dotted Swiss, lawn, batiste and rayon lend themselves
beautifully to the use of sewing machine attachments for ruffling,
tucking, hemming, etc. Fiberglas stitches well and is best suited to
straight panel type curtains with pleated headings. Use a mercerized
thread and size 14 machine needle for Fortisan, synthetics and the many
blends.

The average machine stitch length for these fabrics should be about 12
stitches to the inch and the tensions easy enough to prevent puckering
the fabrics, particularly sheer fabrics, such as batiste, nylons, ninons
and soft rayon blends.

For Damask, brocades, taffetas, satins, etc., use silk or mercerized
thread, size 14 or 11 needles of 12 to 14 stitches per inch.

Heavy weight fabrics, namely, linens, cotton Damasks, sailcloth,
ticking, denims, etc., require a heavy-duty thread, a size 16 needle and
a 12 stitch length.

For light or medium weight fabrics comparable to polished cottons,
Chintz, linens, Glosheen, percale, antique satin and faille, use a
mercerized thread, a size 14 needle and a 12 or 14 stitch length.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

  RETURN
  RETURN
  FIXTURE
  WIDTH
  FLOOR LENGTH
  FRAME
  JAM
  SASH
  SILL
  SILL LENGTH
  APRON
  APRON LENGTH
  BASEBOARD
  CLEAR RUG




                         _Window Measurements_


Before taking measurements, there are several points that should be
taken into consideration: Is the window in proportion to the room? Will
it contribute properly to the effect you wish to achieve? Do you have
the right rods for hanging the type of drapery selected?

When you are satisfied with the window, then it is time to consider the
type of materials for draperies and decide on the type of rod required.

It is a good idea to make a sketch of the room, noting the placement of
windows and arrangement of furniture. Also take the width and height
measurement of each window. Then visit the curtain and drapery
department to get an idea of the type of fixtures available. At the same
time, obtain small samples of the fabrics suited to the type of drapery
you have in mind. Examine them in the room where they are to be used.
Are they the right texture? Are the colors lively enough? Will they
create the desired effect?

Purchase and mount the rods for the draperies. Fixtures should be
mounted so that draperies, when hung, will cover the window frame. Now
you are ready to take measurements.

There are three correct lengths for draperies—to the sill—to the lower
edge of the apron—or to the floor. Full length draperies should just
clear the floor or be long enough to crush on the floor.

_For length_—Measure from the top of the rod down—to the sill—to the
lower edge of apron—or to the floor.

_For width_—Measure from edge to edge of window frame or from outer
edges of fixture brackets. To this measurement add the “return” at
either end; that is, the length from curve of rod to the wall.


           Estimating Yardage for Over-Curtains or Draperies

The type of heading, the width of lower hem and the type of drapery;
that is, lined, unlined or interlined, must be considered when
estimating the yardage required. The fullness of draperies averages
about twice the width of the space to be covered.

A stiffening; such as a strip of crinoline or buckram is used at the top
to support the pleats.

_For Lined Draperies_—To length measurement, add 1″ for heading, 4″ for
hem and 3½″ for bottom hem.

_Example_—If length from top of rod is 90″, add 1″ plus 4″ plus 3½″.
This equals 98½″ for one length, or 5½ yards for the two lengths.

_For Unlined Draperies_—To length measurement, add 1″ for heading, 4½″
for top hem and seam, and 3½″ for lower hem. A 4″ wide strip of
crinoline is used at the top of both lined and unlined drapes.

If a double hem is used at the bottom, then add 6″ instead of 3½″ for
hem in either lined or unlined drapes.

_For Interlined Draperies_—To length measurement, add 1″ for heading, 3″
for top hem and 3″ for bottom hem.

When using ready-made headings for pleats, add to the length measurement
1½″ for heading and seam, and 3½″ for bottom hem.

    [Illustration: _French Doors or Window_

    The rod should be placed so that the drapery, when hung, covers the
    glass portion of the window. Take measurement from top of upper rod
    to lower part of lower rod. To this measurement, add 2½″ at the top
    and 2½″ at the bottom. This allows for a 1½″ hem, top and bottom,
    plus ¼″ seam allowance. The 1½″ hem is for a ¾″ casing and ¾″
    heading.]

  FIXTURE
  FOR WIDTH
  MEASURE FROM TOP AND BOTTOM OF FIXTURE
  FIXTURE


                            Recessed Windows

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

When draperies are hung flush with the wall, measurements are taken
inside the recess. A spring socket type of fixture is available for this
type of window. Always measure from the top of the rod, except for Cafe
curtains. Usually a ring, “sew-on” or “clip-on” type is used. In this
case, measure from lower part of circle to lower part of next section,
or to the sill. Add depth of top finish plus hem to this measurement.

    [Illustration: Oval spring socket.    Round spring socket.]


                        Sliding Windows or Doors

    [Illustration: Hook over or dual wheel design. Cord tension pulley.
    Install on wall, baseboard or floor.]

These windows are usually treated as one. Draperies, in two sections,
are hung on a pole or traverse rod and are drawn to the center, one
section overlapping the other about 2″. Take length measurement from top
of rod to the floor. To this measurement, add 5½″ for heading and top
hem and 3½″ for bottom hem. If double hems are used, add 9″ at the top
plus 6″ for bottom hem. To the width, add 3″ at either end for return of
curtain from fixture to wall.

    [Illustration: Two-way traverse rod.]


                            Projected Window

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

To permit ease when opening or closing the window, the fixture should
extend a little beyond the window on either side. Use a simple fixture,
an oval or round rod, and a draw type of drapery. If drapery is to be
shirred on the rod, take measurement from top of rod to lower edge of
window. To length measurement, add 2½″ for a 1½″ hem which forms the
casing and heading, and 2¾″ to 2½″ bottom hem. If _sew-on_ or _clip-on
rings are used, measure_ from lower circle of ring to edge of window. To
this measurement, add depth of top and bottom hem.

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]


                             Awning Window

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

The type of drapery determines points of measurement. With tier type
draperies, one for each section of the window, the measurements are
taken from top to bottom of each section. Draperies hung from the top
extending to lower edge of window or floor are measured from top of
fixture for length desired. Tier type or cafe sections should be long
enough to overlap the heading of the section below. Follow same
procedure for measuring as for projected window. These draperies should
be full—1½ times the width for medium weight fabrics, such as Chintz,
Glosheen, etc., to three times the width when using sheer fabrics.


                         Methods of installing

Curtain and drapery rods, brackets and valance boards should be mounted
securely to the wall to support heavy draperies. This can be a problem
unless you use the right screws or bolts. There is a correct screw and
bolt available for every type of wall—brick, concrete or plaster walls.

    [Illustration: PLASTER SCREW—For plaster or dry walls.]

    [Illustration: PLASTIC PLUG—Use in brick wall for plug, then insert
    screw.]

    [Illustration: MOLLY BOLT—Use in plaster, brick or concrete wall.]

    [Illustration: TOGGLE BOLT—Use in frame or plaster walls where there
    is a separation between outer and inner walls.]




                         _Construction Details_


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Draperies or over curtains are made of medium weight or heavy fabrics.
They may be unlined, lined or lined and interlined, depending on the
fabric and its treatment—whether formal or informal.

There are three accepted lengths for draperies—to the window sill—to the
bottom of the window apron—or to the floor. Floor length is most
generally used, and for very formal treatments, the drapery is often
made long enough to crush on the floor. Draperies hang straight from the
rod to the floor. If they meet at the top center, they may be draped to
either side and held with ornamental tie-backs or those made of the same
material.

When the type and design of draperies have been decided upon and the
right type of rods have been mounted, then measurements for draperies
can be taken.

Measure from the top of the rod down for length desired. Then add to
length measurement the allowance for top and bottom hems. Review chapter
on “Fabrics” before cutting lengths for draperies.


                           Unlined Draperies

These draperies are informal in treatment and are usually made of light
or medium weight fabrics. Most any type of top finish, shirring or
pleats is suitable. A plain valance or cornice board may be used. For a
pleated heading, allow 5½″ at the top for heading and 5½″ at the bottom
for a 2½″ double hem. Cut strips of crinoline or lawn for stiffening 4″
wide and 3″ shorter than the width of each drapery length. Pin strip to
underside of heading ½″ from the top, starting 1½″ from the edge. Stitch
along lower edge of strip, then turn top edge of fabric over stiffening
½″ and stitch. Turn top hem to underside along edge of stiffening. Press
and pin in place.

Side hems may be put in by hand, machine stitched or blind stitched. For
hand stitching or straight machine stitching, turn edge ½″ to underside;
then turn 1″ for hem. Pin hem in place for stitching.

To blind-stitch hem, using the Zigzag Sewing Machine or the Zigzag
Attachment, pin hem in place; then run a row of hand basting ¼″ from
turned edge. With wrong side of drapery up, turn hem under to right
side, exposing the ¼″ edge. Turn 2½″ double hem at the bottom and finish
by hand or machine stitch.

    [Illustration: Stitch stiffening to top of drapery.]

  STIFFENING
  1½″ BOTH SIDES FOR HEMS
  UNDERSIDE OF MATERIAL

    [Illustration: Finish side hem by hand, using slip-stitch.]

    [Illustration: Side hem basted for blind-stitch hemming.]

    [Illustration: Blind-stitch hemming, using the Zigzag Sewing
    Machine.]

    [Illustration: Double hems with corners cut out to relieve bulk.]

    [Illustration: Finishing double side hems and bottom hem by hand.]

If 1″ double side hems are used, cut stiffening 4″ shorter than the
width of each drapery length. When using a heading with woven-in pockets
for pleater pins, (available by the yard) allow 2″ at the top for
heading and seam. Pin right side of heading to right side of drapery
⁵/₁₆″ below edge across the top. Consider the ″return″ of the drapery at
each side, and position woven-in pockets so that the pleat comes at the
turn of the rod. Stitch, taking ½″ seam; then turn heading to underside.
Press and stitch ¼″ from the lower edge of the heading.

    [Illustration: Type of hook used for forming pleats and hanging
    draperies.]

    [Illustration: RIGHT SIDE OF MATERIAL
    Place pleat tape at top, ⁵/₁₆″ from edge. Stitch ½″ from edge.]

  1½″ BOTH SIDES FOR HEM
  WRONG SIDE OF PLEAT TAPE

    [Illustration: Tape turned to underside. Stitch tape to drapery at
    lower edge. Machine stitch 1″ side hems.]

  SLOTTED SIDE OF PLEAT TAPE


                            Lined Draperies

    [Illustration: Lining in proportion to drapery length.]

  2″
  TOP 4″ HEM
  7″
  LINING
  3″
  2″

Draperies are lined for the protection of the fabric. Linings also give
weight to the draperies, causing them to hang in deeper folds. A
sun-fast white, soft gray or cream colored sateen is generally used as
the lining fabric.

Linings, just as drapery fabrics, must be cut straight with the
crosswise and lengthwise grains.

Always start with a straight crosswise edge. This is obtained by drawing
a crosswise thread and cutting on drawn thread. If fabric slopes up on
one edge, then it should be straightened before pieces are cut.

Very often, when fabrics are rolled on the boards at the mills, the
fabric is rolled more tightly on one end than at the other, drawing the
crosswise threads (weft) in a diagonal line. This is apt to be true in
loosely woven fabrics and particularly lining fabric.

To straighten fabric, first remove selvages, pull fabric gently but
effectively, stretching it diagonally from corner to corner; then
alternate. Grasp the fabric so that you will neither injure nor wrinkle
it. Press before seaming.

Lining should be cut to allow for a 2″ hem at the bottom and a ½″ seam
across the top and sides.

Illustration is for a drapery 2½ yards long, finished with 4″ top hem,
1″ side hems and 3″ bottom hem. Drapery length would measure 98½″ and
lining length, 88½″. The average hem widths, 3″ and 4″, were used in
figuring measurements. The width of hems vary. There is no fixed rule.
They may be 3″—4″—5″ or even 7″ at the top and 2″—2½″—3″ or 4″ at the
bottom. In many cases the bottom hem is doubled, particularly in sheer
or lightweight fabrics. Also the center side hem may be as much as 2″
wide and the outer hem 1″. In this case, the lining is cut 6″ narrower
than the drapery. Before taking measurements for draperies, review
section on _Window Measurements_.

To join lining, turn top edge of lining to underside ½″ and press. Pin
lining and drapery together, starting 7½″ from the top. Stitch from top
of lining down to 4½″ of lower edge of lining, taking a ½″ seam.
Back-stitch at the beginning and end of seam. Press seam as stitched;
then clip seam every 3″ or 4″. Press the seam open. Pin, from hem to
hem, a 4″ wide strip of stiffening to underside across the top. Stitch
and press.

    [Illustration: Straightening material—Pull diagonally from low
    corner.]

    [Illustration: Joining lining to drapery.]

  RIGHT SIDE OF MATERIAL
  7½″
  LINING

    [Illustration: Stiffening stitched to heading.]

  STIFFENING
  1½″ FOR HEM BOTH SIDES
  UNDERSIDE OF MATERIAL

Turn drapery right side out and adjust hems on either side. Be sure
seams are spread open. Press and pin. Turn top hem to underside. Pin and
press. Turn and miter side hem. Cut out top hem even with stiffening and
within 1″ of the top. Pin lining to hem, overlapping lower edge ½″. Side
hem and mitered corner above the lining should be slip-stitched by hand;
then slip-stitch lining to top hem. Press. Allow draperies to hang for 2
or 3 days before putting in lower hems. Then adjust length of drapery so
that it clears the rug or floor. Turn edge under ½″; then turn hem
width. If an allowance is made for a double hem, first turn to underside
one-half the width allowed, then turn again the same width, enclosing
first turn. Slip-stitch hem by hand or stitch by machine. The lining hem
overlaps the drapery hem approximately 1″. Allowance is made for a 2″
hem with ½″ for seam. The lining hem hangs free of the curtain and is
held in position with french tacks spaced about 12″ apart. To french
tack, take 3 or 4 stitches first at top of drapery hem, then lining hem,
then drapery hem, etc., leaving a ½″ or ¾″ length between. Blanket
stitch over the full length of these strands of thread. Fasten thread at
end of tack. Draperies should be anchored at top of return and lower
side hems.

Use a _sew-on_ or _pin-on_ weight at bottom of center hems.

(See illustration at top of page 22.)

    [Illustration: Cut out end of top hem to eliminate bulk.]

  LINING TURNED BACK

    [Illustration: Lining slip-stitched to top hem.]

  LINING

    [Illustration: Making a French tack.]

  LINING

    [Illustration: ‘Sew-on’ or ‘pin-on’ weights.]

    [Illustration: Lined drapery with pleater tape heading.]

    [Illustration: Side hems tacked to insure evenness.]

When using a tape with woven-in pockets for pleater pins, allow 2″ above
the rod for heading and seam. See instructions under the section
_Unlined Draperies_ for joining tape to heading. Join lining; then clip
and press seams. Turn drapery to right side and pin lining to bottom of
tape, overlapping ¼″. Stitch and press; then finish side hems above
lining by hand.

It is a good idea to tack the side hems along stitching line. This
prevents them from slipping and hems always appear sharper. Using
matching thread and working from the underside, insert needle through
the seam down through to the right side, picking up a thread or two of
the fabric. Then bring needle back up through the seam. Insert needle at
the same point and direct needle along the seam between the hem a
distance of 1″. Bring needle up through seam; then direct needle down
through seam at same point, picking up two or three threads, and then up
through seam again. Continue this tacking the length of the hem.


                          Drapery lined to top

There are times that draperies are lined to the top instead of using a
hem, particularly when a valance or cornice board is used. To the length
measurement, add 1½″ at the top for heading and seam. Cut lining in
proportion. Stitch lining and drapery lengths together, bringing edges
even at the top. Clip seam and press open. Cut stiffening the length of
drapery width. Pin and stitch stiffening across the top, taking ½″ seam.
Turn drapery right side out, enclosing heading. Press top and side hems.
Finish hems at the bottom the same as for lined draperies.

    [Illustration: Joining stiffening to lining and drapery at top.]

    [Illustration: Drapery turned to right side.]


                          Interlined Draperies

Draperies are often interlined, particularly in very formal rooms, or
when the character of the material is such that the extra weight is
necessary for its protection. Interlining also adds to the draping
quality and elegance of the fabric.

For an interlining fabric, use good quality cotton flannel. Cut
interlining the exact measurements of draperies when finished; that is,
if draperies have 1½″ hems on each side and 3″ hems, top and bottom,
then cut interlining 3″ narrower and 6″ shorter than drapery fabric.
Spread material right side down.

    [Illustration: Tack interlining to drapery at center and between
    center and side hems.]

  3″
  TACK DOWN THROUGH CENTER
  INTERLINING FOLDED LENGTHWISE FOR TACKING
  1½″

    [Illustration: Turn and baste hems—side, top, and bottom.]

  UNDERSIDE OF MATERIAL
  INTERLINING

Fold interlining through lengthwise center. Place fold on exact center
of drapery fabric and tack together loosely. Take a stitch in the
drapery; bring needle up through fold of interlining and leave a loop.
Space about 6″; take a stitch in drapery, then interlining, then
drapery, etc. Do not pull thread taut. When row is finished, fold
interlining halfway between center and edge on both sides and tack in
the same manner, making three rows of vertical tacking.

    [Illustration: Catch-stitch hems to interlining.]

Turn side hems back over interlining. Pin and baste. Then turn top and
bottom hems. Pin and baste. Miter hems at corners. All hems may be
catch-stitched to the interlining, and the lining slip-stitched to top
and side hems. Linings may also be joined by machine. Turn hem and
baste; then pin lining to drapery and stitch, taking ½″ seam. Press seam
as stitched. Then clip and press seam open the same as for all lined
curtains and draperies.

    [Illustration: Turn sides and top of lining under ½″. Pin in place,
    slip-stitch.]

When lining is joined to drapery by machine, tack interlining and lining
together along seam. Take stitch in seam, then in interlining. Space
stitching 3″ or 4″ apart. Do not draw thread taut. Turn top and bottom
hems and catch-stitch. Pin lining to hem across the top and slip-stitch.
Turn hem in lining and stitch. Allowance should be made for a 2″ hem,
overlapping the hem in drapery approximately 1″. Use french tacks
between lining hem and drapery to hold lining in place. Use either
‘sew-on’ or ‘pin-on’ weight at bottom of side hems.

    [Illustration: When lining is machine stitched to drapery, tack seam
    to interlining.]

    [Illustration: French tacks hold drapery and lining together.]




                         _Measuring for Pleats_


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

The use of pleats is one of the most effective ways of controlling the
fullness of a drapery that is made to hang in balanced, graceful folds.
The types most generally used are the pinch pleat, the French pleat, the
box pleat and the cartridge pleat.

Pleats should be made in groups of uneven numbers, 5-7-9, or as many as
are required to take up the amount allowed for fullness. For very sheer
fabrics, the allowance for fullness should be 3 times the width of the
window or space to be covered. To figure the spacings and amount to be
taken up in pleats, take the measurement of the space to be covered plus
the return; that is, the distance from turn of rod to the wall or the
bracket supporting the rod on either end, plus the overlap at the center
when curtains are drawn together. The width allowed for draperies minus
these three measurements is to be taken up in pleats.

The fullness of each type of pleat and space between depends on the
weight of the material and amount allowed for fullness of the curtain.

_For Example_: If one half of the width to be covered is 49″ then one
section of the drapery would be about 144″ wide after finishing side
hems. To width of window area (49″), add 3″ for return and 1″ for center
overlap. This totals 53″. 144″ minus 53″ equals 91″ for pleats. Allowing
7″ for each pleat, 13 pleats will be required to take up the fullness.

Please Note—3″ for return is used as an example. The return can be 4″ or
5″, depending on type of rod or bracket. Always measure the return.


                            Steps to Pleats

Always measure and mark the exact position and width for all pleats and
spacings before stitching.

Measure the width of the return from outer edge. Then measure for the
first pleat at the curve of the rod. Place second pleat on opposite side
2″ from center edge. The third pleat is placed at the exact center
between the first and second pleat. The remaining number of pleats
required is evenly spaced between the 1st and 3rd and between the 2nd
and 3rd pleats. To form pleats, bring markings for pleats together. Pin;
then stitch from top to ¾″ below the heading, reversing the stitch at
either end.

    [Illustration: 1. Bring the markings together for pleat and pin.

    2. Stitch from top to about ¾″ below heading, reversing stitch at
    each end.

    These steps are the same for all types of pleats.]

    [Illustration: _Pinch Pleat_—Divide the large pleat evenly into
    three smaller pleats; press in firmly and stitch across the three
    folds at lower edge of heading. The Pinch pleat is a favorite finish
    for most types of draperies and is particularly good when draperies
    are made of a heavier fabric.]

    [Illustration: _French Pleat_—At lower edge of heading, divide large
    pleat into three smaller pleats and run needle and thread through
    three pleats several times, drawing thread tight. Then fasten thread
    securely underneath.]

    [Illustration: _Box Pleat_—The large pleat is spread an equal
    distance on each side of stitching and pressed flat. Box pleats
    should be about 2″ wide, taking up 4″ fullness.

    When figuring these pleats, try for uniformity; that is, the space
    between each pleat (from fold to fold) should be the same as the
    width of pleat. Box pleats should be about 2″ wide, taking up 4″
    fullness.]

    [Illustration: _Cartridge Pleat_—This is a round pleat left loose
    and filled with cotton, Kapok or a roll of stiff paper. The pleats
    take up 2″ to 2½″ and are spaced from 2″ to 3″ apart for draw type
    draperies.]

    [Illustration: 1. Type of pins used if curtain is hung from traverse
    rod.]

    [Illustration: 2. Type of pins used if curtain is hung from rod with
    rings or from traverse rod mounted against ceiling.]


                      Doors or Windows Opening Out

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Box Pleats, extending above the heading to form a loop, make an
interesting treatment for unlined curtains draping a French window or
door that opens out.

Draperies hang from a rod drawn through the loops. Fabrics, such as
Fortisan blends, antique satin, taffetas and sheer linens are suitable
for these curtains.

Measure from top of rod to floor for length. Add 9½″ at top for seam,
loops, and facing and 6″ for a 3″ double bottom hem. Allow 3 times the
width of space to be covered for fullness.

_Example_: If space to be covered is 52″, 3 lengths of 48″ fabric are
required. Cut one length through center and join each half width to each
one of the full widths. Each section measures approximately 70″. 70″
minus 4″ for 1″ double hems and 3″ for return equals 63″. 7 pleats × 5″
= 35″. 63″ minus 35″ = 28″ for space to be covered and center overlap.

    [Illustration: 1. Measuring for pleats, spacings and loops. Pleats
    may be wider or as narrow as desired. Spacings may vary, depending
    on weight of material. Always consider the pleat overlap.]

    [Illustration: 2. Turn top to right side 9½″. Use a stiffening or
    stay of lawn or organdy for most light and medium weight materials.
    Arrows indicate stitching lines.]

    [Illustration: 3. Material is cut out between loops. Seams are
    slashed diagonally at corners to line of stitching. Press. If
    stiffening is not used as shown in sketches 1 and 2, stitch 4″ strip
    of crinoline to hem as shown above. This lends support to pleats.]

    [Illustration: 4. Turn loops right side out and hem to underside.
    Press. Pin in pleat, stitch same as for Box pleat. Spread pleat,
    press.]

    [Illustration: 5. Fasten loops to back of pleat by hand. Anchor
    curtains at side, top and bottom as shown page 15.]

    [Illustration: Pattern for tie-back pinned to material.]

    [Illustration: Tie-back stitched—Seam blended ready for turning.]


                               Tie-Backs

Fabric tie-backs for draperies are usually tailored, straight or shaped
bands which match or harmonize with the drapery in color and design. The
fullness of the drapery determines the length of the tie-back. To
estimate length, loop a strip of material around the drapery, drawing it
back to side of window for the best effect. Lengths may vary from 18″ to
24″ and can be 2½″ or more in width. They are usually lined or faced and
interlined. Use a stiffening of heavy muslin or crinoline in a shaped
band. For shaped band, cut a paper pattern about 3″ or 4″ wide in the
center, tapering to 2″ or 2½″ at the end as illustrated. Cut fabric,
lining and stiffening the same as pattern, allowing for a ⅜″ seam on all
edges.

Pin stiffening to underside of band, and lining to right side of
material—right sides together. Stitch, leaving an opening of 3″ or 4″
for turning.

Trim stiffening to stitching line and blend edge of lining. Press. Turn
band right side out and press. Slip-stitch lining to band at opening.

Sew small bone rings or very narrow fabric loops at ends of band. These
loop over a hook fastened to side of window.


                          Anchoring Draperies

    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Outside edges of draperies should hang against the wall in a straight
taut line. Sew a plastic ring to the bottom hem. Place a cup hook in the
wall or the baseboard in line with the hem.




      _Meet the sewing machine with tomorrow written all over it._


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

  _Does all 3 kinds of sewing—straight, zig-zag and chainstitch._
  _Hundreds of zig-zag patterns built-in—just touch a button and sew._
  _Spinning reel thread system—for smooth, even thread flow._
  _New speed switch—set your own sewing speed, fast or slow._
  _New built-in needle threader—ends that last little sewing worry._
  _Push-Button Bobbin—winds right in the machine._
  _Exclusive Slant Needle—see better, sew smoother._
  _New 4-position throat plate lever—an extra for delicate fabrics._
  _New buttonholer device—makes 7 kinds of buttonholes easily._

_New Golden Touch & Sew_[1] _sewing machine by Singer._ Be the girl with
the golden touch on this newest and most fabulous of our growing family
of _Touch & Sew_ sewing machines with the Push-Button Bobbin. One of
five new models starting at $149.95.

    [Illustration: ™ SINGER]

         See SINGER COMPANY in phone book for Shop nearest you.


                         SINGER SEWING LIBRARY
                   You’re sure to want a complete set

    [Illustration: SINGER Sewing Library]

Here are the newest, most informative, “how to” sewing books available
today! Together they make up a complete dressmaking—home decorations
library. Fully illustrated, each one covers its subject step-by-step,
answering all your questions—in as few words as possible—almost before
you ask them. Choose your needs from the selection of books listed
below.

  101—HOW TO MAKE CURTAINS
  102—HOW TO MAKE DRAPERIES
  103—HOW TO MAKE VALANCES
  104—HOW TO MAKE BEDSPREADS
  105—HOW TO LAY OUT A PATTERN AND CUT
  106—HOW TO MEASURE, ALTER AND FIT
  107—HOW TO MAKE SEAMS AND FINISHES
  108—HOW TO MAKE SLEEVES
  109—HOW TO MAKE BUTTONHOLES AND POCKETS
  110—HOW TO MAKE COLLARS, FINISH NECKLINES
  111—HOW TO MAKE ZIPPER CLOSURES
  112—HOW TO MAKE BELTS AND HEMS
  113—HOW TO MAKE SLIP COVERS
  114—HOW TO MAKE CAFE CURTAINS
  115—THINGS FOR LITTLE GIRLS TO SEW
  116—CREATING CHARM WHEN SEWING FOR GIRLS
  117—HOW TO REINFORCE, REPAIR AND REFIT
  118—HOW TO DO DRESSMAKER TAILORING
  119—HOW TO MAKE APRONS
  120—HOW TO MAKE CUSHIONS, PILLOWS, AND BOLSTERS
  121—HOW TO SEW FOR BABIES

Singer Sewing library Books are available at Singer Centers, variety,
chain and department stores ... where you will also find the SINGER
SEWING SHELF—for sewing machine parts and supplies.


[1]A Trademark of THE SINGER COMPANY


                   _Cover Photograph reprinted from the BRIDE’S MAGAZINE
                      Copyright 1957, The Condé Nast Publications, Inc._


        Printed in the United States of America    Book No. 102




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Make Draperies, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO MAKE DRAPERIES ***

***** This file should be named 63282-0.txt or 63282-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/3/2/8/63282/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

